About the Scheme

What is PMAY-U 2.0?

Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Urban 2.0 (PMAY-U 2.0) aims at providing Central Assistance to 1 crore eligible families/beneficiaries through States/UTs/PLIs to construct, purchase or rent affordable houses in urban areas over a period of 5 years.

What would be the implementation period of PMAY-U 2.0?

The scheme will be implemented for a period of 5 years from 2024 to 2029.

How can States/UTs participate in PMAY-U 2.0?

States/UTs need to sign a MoA with the MoHUA, agreeing on implementation of reforms proposed under the scheme including formulation of Affordable Housing Policy institutionalizing incentives to be provided to the developers amongst others.    

What is the eligibility criteria for seeking benefit under the scheme?

Families belonging to EWS/LIG/MIG segments, living in urban areas, having no pucca house either in his / her name or in the name of any member of his / her family anywhere in the country are eligible to purchase/construct or rent a house under PMAY 2.0.

Whether the curtailed beneficiary under PAMY-U, can avail the benefit under PMAY (U) 2.0?

NO, the houses sanctioned under PMAY-U which got curtailed by CSMC after 31.12.2023 due to any reason on the recommendation of States/UTs, houses will not be sanctioned in PMAY-U 2.0 to those beneficiaries. 

Can a beneficiary choose to get benefit from PMAY-G or PMAY-U if the territorial extant lies in verge of Urban or Rural areas? 

Beneficiaries may avail benefits in either PMAY-G or PMAY-U 2.0, depending on their jurisdiction.

Further, beneficiaries may avail benefit in PMAY-G or PMAY-U 2.0 as per their jurisdiction. The MIS linkage between Department of Rural Development for PMAY(G) and MoHUA for PMAY(U) would be done to avoid duplication of beneficiaries. The final list may be checked before sending to CSMC.

What happens if I have availed benefits from housing schemes in the past?

Applicants who have availed benefits from any housing scheme of Central Govt., State Govt., or Local Self Govt. in the last 20 years will not be eligible for the Interest Subsidy Scheme.

What is the definition of a pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0?

A 'Pucca' house is defined as an all-weather dwelling unit having roof and wall are made up of sturdy, modern, and durable materials like burnt bricks, stones packed with cement or lime, cement concrete, timber, Galvanized Iron (GI) sheets, asbestos sheets, machine-made tiles etc. regardless of whether the floor is Kutcha 

What is the definition of beneficiary under the scheme?

A beneficiary is defined as a family comprising of husband, wife and unmarried children.

What is the definition of EWS, LIG and MIG for the purpose of the scheme?

         EWS households are defined as households with an annual income up to ₹3 lakh. LIG households are defined as households with an annual income from ₹3 lakh up to ₹6 lakh. MIG households are defined as households with an annual income from ₹6 lakh up to ₹9 lakh. 

What are the basic facilities provided in a pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0?

A pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0 will mandatorily have basic facilities such as kitchen, toilet, electricity and water connection. 

Areas covered under PMAY-U 2.0

PMAY-U 2.0 covers all statutory towns as per Census 2011 and towns notified subsequently. It also includes Notified Planning Areas and areas within the jurisdiction of Industrial Development Authorities, Special Area Development Authorities, Urban Development Authorities, or any such Authority under State legislation entrusted with urban planning and regulation functions.

Are newly notified towns included in PMAY-U 2.0?

Yes, towns notified during implementation period of PMAY-U 2.0 will also be included under the scheme based on gazette notifications of States/UTs with approval from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA).  

Is PMAY-U 2.0 focussing on any special group of beneficiaries? 

Yes, the scheme also focusses on special groups such as Safai Karmi, Street Vendors identified under Pradhan Mantri Street Vendor's AtmaNirbhar Nidhi (PMSVANidhi) Scheme and different artisans under Pradhan Mantri-Vishwakarma Scheme, Anganwadi Workers, Building and other Construction Workers (BoCW), slum dwellers/chawls and other groups identified during operation of the scheme. 

Whether scheme will provide preferences to any social group? 

Yes, preference under the scheme will also be given to manual scavengers, widows, Persons with Disabilities, Transgenders, persons belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, and Minorities.

What are the different verticals implemented in the scheme?

The PMAY-U 2.0 will be implemented through four verticals as under:

Beneficiary Led Construction (BLC)

Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP)

Affordable Rental Housing (ARH)

Interest Subsidy Scheme (ISS)

How to choose a vertical to avail scheme benefits?

The Beneficiaries can choose from any one of the four verticals of the Scheme with the help of State/UTs/ULBs/PLIs or by submitting online application or by participating in the rapid assessment. 

How beneficiary can apply for the housing support under the scheme?

The beneficiaries meeting the eligibility criteria defined under the scheme, may submit the application in defined format through online portal of the PMAY-U 2.0, Common Service Centres or by visiting the concerned Urban Local Bodies/Municipalities they are residing in. 

What documents needs to be submitted along with the application form under the scheme?

The beneficiary need to submit copy of their Adhar Card, bank account details, undertaking for meeting eligibility criteria as per prescribed format, land ownership documents in case of BLC or any other documents specified by the States/UTs.     

What is the house size under various verticals of PMAY-U 2.0?
The Scheme will support construction of houses of not less than 30 square meter (sqm) carpet area along with basic infrastructure. Houses upto 45 sqm, 60 sqm, 120 sqm will be supported under BLC/AHP, ARH, ISS verticals respectively. 

What is carpet area?
The area enclosed within the walls, actual area to lay the carpet. This area does not include the thickness of the inner walls. 

How is the housing demand assessed under PMAY-U 2.0?
Cities will undertake a rapid assessment of housing demand through suitable means in both online and offline modes. During the demand survey cities shall include all eligible beneficiaries including the special focus groups.

What is the City Wise Plan?
The city-wise plan will have total and annual housing demand of eligible beneficiaries in the city, including details of special focus group beneficiaries and the selected interventions from the three verticals.

How does PMAY-U 2.0 aim to enhance housing affordability?
PMAY-U 2.0 aims to enhance housing affordability for EWS, LIG, and MIG segments by providing financial assistance and support, making it easier for eligible urban families to construct/purchase/rent a house.

How Women empowerment is promoted under the scheme?
The scheme guidelines mandate ownership of the house to be in the name of female head of the household or in joint ownership with the male member. 

What is difference in Central Sector Scheme and Centrally Sponsored Scheme?
Central Sector Scheme are 100% funded by the Union government and implemented by the Central Government machinery. In Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) a certain percentage of the funding is borne by the States and the implementation is by the State Governments.

How is the scheme of PMAY-U 2.0 monitored at ground level?
The scheme will be monitored by Unified Web Portal/Management Information System (MIS) developed in the Scheme. 

What function will MIS have under PMAY-U2.0?
The MIS of PMAY-U 2.0 will be used to monitor and evaluate the scheme which will be accessible to all stakeholders such as States/UTs/ULBs/PLIs etc. It will have a real-time progress on key performance indicators, dashboards, and analytics to enable informed decision-making by program managers and policymakers. The MIS will have the facility for the beneficiaries to apply and track their application status on real-time basis.



