About the Scheme

What is PMAY-U 2.0?

Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Urban 2.0 (PMAY-U 2.0) aims at providing Central Assistance to 1 crore eligible families/beneficiaries through States/UTs/PLIs to construct, purchase or rent affordable houses in urban areas over a period of 5 years.

What would be the implementation period of PMAY-U 2.0?

The scheme will be implemented for a period of 5 years from 2024 to 2029.

How can States/UTs participate in PMAY-U 2.0?

States/UTs need to sign a MoA with the MoHUA, agreeing on implementation of reforms proposed under the scheme including formulation of Affordable Housing Policy institutionalizing incentives to be provided to the developers amongst others.    

What is the eligibility criteria for seeking benefit under the scheme?

Families belonging to EWS/LIG/MIG segments, living in urban areas, having no pucca house either in his / her name or in the name of any member of his / her family anywhere in the country are eligible to purchase/construct or rent a house under PMAY 2.0.

Whether the curtailed beneficiary under PAMY-U, can avail the benefit under PMAY (U) 2.0?

NO, the houses sanctioned under PMAY-U which got curtailed by CSMC after 31.12.2023 due to any reason on the recommendation of States/UTs, houses will not be sanctioned in PMAY-U 2.0 to those beneficiaries. 

Can a beneficiary choose to get benefit from PMAY-G or PMAY-U if the territorial extant lies in verge of Urban or Rural areas? 

Beneficiaries may avail benefits in either PMAY-G or PMAY-U 2.0, depending on their jurisdiction.

Further, beneficiaries may avail benefit in PMAY-G or PMAY-U 2.0 as per their jurisdiction. The MIS linkage between Department of Rural Development for PMAY(G) and MoHUA for PMAY(U) would be done to avoid duplication of beneficiaries. The final list may be checked before sending to CSMC.

What happens if I have availed benefits from housing schemes in the past?

Applicants who have availed benefits from any housing scheme of Central Govt., State Govt., or Local Self Govt. in the last 20 years will not be eligible for the Interest Subsidy Scheme.

What is the definition of a pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0?

A 'Pucca' house is defined as an all-weather dwelling unit having roof and wall are made up of sturdy, modern, and durable materials like burnt bricks, stones packed with cement or lime, cement concrete, timber, Galvanized Iron (GI) sheets, asbestos sheets, machine-made tiles etc. regardless of whether the floor is Kutcha 

What is the definition of beneficiary under the scheme?

A beneficiary is defined as a family comprising of husband, wife and unmarried children.

What is the definition of EWS, LIG and MIG for the purpose of the scheme?

         EWS households are defined as households with an annual income up to ₹3 lakh. LIG households are defined as households with an annual income from ₹3 lakh up to ₹6 lakh. MIG households are defined as households with an annual income from ₹6 lakh up to ₹9 lakh. 

What are the basic facilities provided in a pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0?

A pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0 will mandatorily have basic facilities such as kitchen, toilet, electricity and water connection. 

Areas covered under PMAY-U 2.0

PMAY-U 2.0 covers all statutory towns as per Census 2011 and towns notified subsequently. It also includes Notified Planning Areas and areas within the jurisdiction of Industrial Development Authorities, Special Area Development Authorities, Urban Development Authorities, or any such Authority under State legislation entrusted with urban planning and regulation functions.

Are newly notified towns included in PMAY-U 2.0?

Yes, towns notified during implementation period of PMAY-U 2.0 will also be included under the scheme based on gazette notifications of States/UTs with approval from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA).  

Is PMAY-U 2.0 focussing on any special group of beneficiaries? 

Yes, the scheme also focusses on special groups such as Safai Karmi, Street Vendors identified under Pradhan Mantri Street Vendor's AtmaNirbhar Nidhi (PMSVANidhi) Scheme and different artisans under Pradhan Mantri-Vishwakarma Scheme, Anganwadi Workers, Building and other Construction Workers (BoCW), slum dwellers/chawls and other groups identified during operation of the scheme. 

Whether scheme will provide preferences to any social group? 

Yes, preference under the scheme will also be given to manual scavengers, widows, Persons with Disabilities, Transgenders, persons belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, and Minorities.

What are the different verticals implemented in the scheme?

The PMAY-U 2.0 will be implemented through four verticals as under:

Beneficiary Led Construction (BLC)

Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP)

Affordable Rental Housing (ARH)

Interest Subsidy Scheme (ISS)

How to choose a vertical to avail scheme benefits?

The Beneficiaries can choose from any one of the four verticals of the Scheme with the help of State/UTs/ULBs/PLIs or by submitting online application or by participating in the rapid assessment. 

How beneficiary can apply for the housing support under the scheme?

The beneficiaries meeting the eligibility criteria defined under the scheme, may submit the application in defined format through online portal of the PMAY-U 2.0, Common Service Centres or by visiting the concerned Urban Local Bodies/Municipalities they are residing in. 

What documents needs to be submitted along with the application form under the scheme?

The beneficiary need to submit copy of their Adhar Card, bank account details, undertaking for meeting eligibility criteria as per prescribed format, land ownership documents in case of BLC or any other documents specified by the States/UTs.     

What is the house size under various verticals of PMAY-U 2.0?

The Scheme will support construction of houses of not less than 30 square meter (sqm) carpet area along with basic infrastructure. Houses upto 45 sqm, 60 sqm, 120 sqm will be supported under BLC/AHP, ARH, ISS verticals respectively. 

What is carpet area? 

The area enclosed within the walls, actual area to lay the carpet. This area does not include the thickness of the inner walls. 

How is the housing demand assessed under PMAY-U 2.0?

Cities will undertake a rapid assessment of housing demand through suitable means in both online and offline modes. During the demand survey cities shall include all eligible beneficiaries including the special focus groups.

What is the City Wise Plan?

The city-wise plan will have total and annual housing demand of eligible beneficiaries in the city, including details of special focus group beneficiaries and the selected interventions from the three verticals.

How does PMAY-U 2.0 aim to enhance housing affordability?

PMAY-U 2.0 aims to enhance housing affordability for EWS, LIG, and MIG segments by providing financial assistance and support, making it easier for eligible urban families to construct/purchase/rent a house.

How Women empowerment is promoted under the scheme?

The scheme guidelines mandate ownership of the house to be in the name of female head of the household or in joint ownership with the male member. 

What is difference in Central Sector Scheme and Centrally Sponsored Scheme?

Central Sector Scheme are 100% funded by the Union government and implemented by the Central Government machinery. In Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) a certain percentage of the funding is borne by the States and the implementation is by the State Governments.

How is the scheme of PMAY-U 2.0 monitored at ground level?

The scheme will be monitored by Unified Web Portal/Management Information System (MIS) developed in the Scheme. 

What function will MIS have under PMAY-U2.0?

The MIS of PMAY-U 2.0 will be used to monitor and evaluate the scheme which will be accessible to all stakeholders such as States/UTs/ULBs/PLIs etc. It will have a real-time progress on key performance indicators, dashboards, and analytics to enable informed decision-making by program managers and policymakers. The MIS will have the facility for the beneficiaries to apply and track their application status on real-time basis.

Beneficiary Led Construction-BLC

What is Beneficiary Led Construction (BLC)? 

This vertical of the scheme shall provide assistance to individual eligible families belonging to EWS category to construct new houses on their own available vacant land.

What is the funding mechanism under the BLC vertical?

The cost of house construction shall be shared among Ministry, State/UT/ULB and identified eligible beneficiaries. The Central Assistance proposed along with State/UT share under BLC is as under:

State/UT

Central Govt.

State/UT Govt.

North-Eastern Region States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Union Territory (UT) of J&K, Puducherry and Delhi

₹2.25 Lakh

Min ₹0.25 Lakh

All other UTs

₹2.50 Lakh

-

Remaining States

₹1.50 Lakh

Min ₹1 Lakh

How will Central Assistance be released under the BLC vertical?

Central Assistance will be released directly through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) to the bank accounts of beneficiaries of BLC component in three instalments 40:40:20 identified in projects through States/UTs.

How one can avail the benefits under BLC vertical?

Or

What is the process to apply for a house under BLC vertical?

Beneficiaries desirous of availing the assistance under this vertical shall approach the ULBs/Implementing Agencies/Unified web portal, with necessary documents, including ownership proof of land owned by them. 

What are the documents required for availing of benefits under the BLC vertical?

Beneficiaries desirous of availing the assistance under this vertical shall approach the ULBs/Implementing Agencies/Unified web portal, with necessary documents, including 

Proof of Identity (Aadhaar card, PAN, voter ID, Passport etc.)

Proof of address (ration card, utility bills, etc.)

Income certificate

Land ownership documents

An affidavit stating the beneficiary does not own a pucca house

What are the norms for constructing a house under BLC vertical?

The beneficiaries under this vertical may be allowed to construct the all-weather pucca house of 30-45 sqm. carpet area for EWS and should conform to the building safety and design standards provided in National Building Code (NBC).

What are the basic facilities provided in a pucca house under BLC vertical?

A pucca house constructed under BLC vertical of PMAY-U 2.0 will mandatorily have basic facilities such as kitchen, toilet, electricity and water connection.

Can slum dwellers avail the benefits under BLC?

In case, a tenable slum in any ULB has a requirement of pucca house, the State/UT Government can propose the projects/list of those eligible beneficiaries for sanctioning of Central Assistance under BLC vertical.

How a landless beneficiary construct a house under the BLC vertical?

In the case of landless beneficiaries, States/UTs at their expense may provision heritable, but non-transferable land rights (pattas) to the family, making them eligible under the BLC vertical.

What is the process for approval of houses under BLC vertical?

On receipt of applications from citizen/ULB/CSC via unified web portal, the ULBs will prepare projects for such beneficiaries in accordance with the city-wise plans. This should be approved by the State Level Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (SLSMC) at State/UT level and to be submitted to Central Sanction and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) for final approval. 

What are the pre-requisite for considering beneficiaries under BLC vertical?

The States/UTs/ULBs should ensure that the required finance for constructing a planned house under this vertical is available with the beneficiary.

What will be the State and beneficiary contribution for availing the house under the BLC vertical of the scheme?

The State is mandatorily required to provide their minimum share corresponding to the central share and the remaining cost for construction of the house will be borne by the beneficiary.

Can the State release funds to the beneficiaries after approval of projects from the Central Government ?

Yes, States/UTs may release the first installment of financial assistance to eligible beneficiaries approved by SLSMC/CSMC, from their share without waiting for the Central Assistance so that the work on ground may be started.

What is the role of ULB in implementing the BLC vertical ?

The ULB is responsible for identifying/verifying eligible beneficiaries, preparing and submitting list of eligible beneficiaries for approval in SLSMC and CSMC. Additionally, monitoring and ensuring the timely completion of houses, disbursing funds to beneficiaries based on construction milestones are the responsibilities of ULBs.

Can innovative construction materials and techniques also be used in construction of BLC houses?

States/UTs are advised to create awareness among the beneficiaries on the use of innovative construction materials and techniques which would enhance the thermal comfort, energy efficiency and disaster resilience in a house.

Can beneficiaries under the BLC component avail of a loan for construction?

Yes, beneficiaries can avail of a loan from banks or housing finance companies in addition to the central assistance provided under the BLC component but they would not be eligible for subsidy under ISS vertical of the scheme.

How is the progress of BLC projects monitored?

The Monitoring mechanisms include Monthly Financial and physical progress reports as submitted by ULBs/implementing agencies/SLNAs. The periodic inspections by State/UT officials at ground level along with the review meetings by the SLSMC will also be convened. Further, the progress of houses will be tracked through Geo-tagging at various stages and other digital norms so that each house can be monitored effectively at every stage of construction. 

How many construction stages of a house is required to be captured in geo-tagging?

The Geo-tagging of houses will be done in minimum 3 construction stages as per the payment plan. The number of Geo-tagging stages may be increased as per the requirements of State/UT Government. 

Is Geotagging of houses under BLC vertical allowed by the beneficiary?

The beneficiaries shall also be allowed to Geo-tag the progress of the houses through the applicable modalities and subsequently, the ULB authorities shall monitor and approve the Geo-tagging status of the house as captured by the beneficiary for subsequent release of funds. The ULB will be required to approve the geo-tagging as captured by the beneficiary with in 15 days of uploading failing which the geo-tagging will be auto approved by the system.

Affordable Housing in Partnership-AHP

How many models are implemented under AHP vertical?

AHP is a supply side intervention adopting two models:

AHP by public sector agencies and parastatals

Private Sector AHP Projects

What is the funding mechanism under the AHP vertical by public sector agency and parastatals ?

The cost of house construction shall be shared among Ministry, State/UT/ULB and identified eligible beneficiaries. The Central Assistance proposed along with State/UT share under AHP is as under:

State/UT

Central Govt.

State/UT Govt.

North-Eastern Region States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Union Territory (UT) of J&K, Puducherry and Delhi

₹2.25 Lakh

Min ₹0.25 Lakh

All other UTs

₹2.50 Lakh

-

Remaining States

₹1.50 Lakh

Min ₹1 Lakh

How the prices of EWS houses be decided under AHP vertical?

The States/UTs can decide on the upper ceiling of the sale price for EWS houses in rupees per square meter of carpet area. This makes such projects affordable and accessible to intended beneficiaries. 

What are the key factors to be considered for AHP by Public Sector Agencies and Parastatals? 

Submission of encumbrance free ownership document of land is the prerequisite for the approval of AHP projects. The agency has to prepare the DPR for AHP projects which should be comprehensive in nature and shall mandatorily include housing as well as all infrastructure related provision.  

What is the minimum number of EWS houses to be built in a mixed housing project?

An Affordable Housing Project can be a mix of houses for different categories with at least 100 houses. However, it will be eligible for Central Assistance, only if at least 25% of the houses in the project are earmarked for the EWS category.

Who will provide the trunk infrastructure in AHP projects?

States/UTs through their implementing agencies will provide trunk infrastructure from their resources up to project site. 

Can housing projects for tenable slums be taken up in AHP vertical?

Yes, under AHP vertical, States/UTs may also propose redevelopment or in-situ improvement projects for tenable slums having dilapidated buildings located on Government/ULB/Public land. Under this, the existing slum will be demolished and redeveloped in the form of multi-storied building with all basic amenities and social infrastructure.

Can housing projects for untenable slums be taken up in AHP vertical?

Yes, the State/UT may also propose projects for resettlement of “Untenable slums” which are located on environmentally hazardous sites to appropriate sites by constructing new housing colonies/group houses in alternate land with access to all basic amenities and infrastructure. 

After slum development, does it also have to be de-notified?

Yes, all slums developed under AHP vertical would be compulsorily de-notified by States/UTs.

What is the procedure to be followed for allotment of houses?

Allotment of houses to identified eligible beneficiaries in AHP projects should be made through a transparent procedure as approved by SLSMC. Preference in allotment should be given to the beneficiaries of special focus group as defined in the scheme guidelines. 

Can the beneficiary sell the house owned under AHP projects?

No, the beneficiary will not be able to sell a house as these houses will have a mandatory lock-in period of minimum 5 years from the date of allotment.

What process will be adopted for approval of private sector AHP projects?

The States/UTs/ULB shall whitelist the private sector projects as per the checklist and after approval of SLSMC and CSMC. Afterwards, it will be eligible for incentives.

What are the proposed incentives for Public/Private entities?

To encourage participation of Public/Private entities, incentives on following lines by the State Government, are being proposed:

Single Window time bound approval of building plans and layouts with minimal compliances devising a green channel approach. 

50% additional FAR, with TDR facility free of cost, and built-up area used for EWS/LIG, not to be counted in overall FAR of the project. 

Exemption of charges in Land Conversion/Land Use changes. 

Exemption of all statutory charges such as developmental charges, scrutiny charges, layout deposit and other related charges. 

100% exemption of income tax on profit/income accrued from AHP projects. 

Input tax credit on GST for AHP projects.

How much additional Grant is provisioned in AHP projects for using innovative construction technology?

Projects using innovative construction technologies notified by MoHUA shall be eligible for an additional Grant in the form of Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) @₹1000 per sqm on built up area (including internal infrastructure) for 30 sqm. per unit to the implementing agencies under AHP vertical.

How Central Assistance will be released for Private Sector AHP Projects?

Under this AHP vertical, the Central Assistance shall be provided to the beneficiaries of EWS categories in the form of Redeemable Housing Vouchers (RHV) for purchase of a house from the whitelisted private projects in PMAY-U 2.0. 

How will beneficiaries get houses in private sector AHP projects?

The eligible EWS beneficiaries may purchase a house in whitelisted private projects from the open-market and redeem their housing vouchers. 

