What is Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban) and its objectives and scope?
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban) for ensuring housing for all in urban areas was launched on 25th June 2015 providing pucca houses to all eligible beneficiaries by 2022. The Mission provides Central Assistance to implementing agencies through States/Union Territories (UTs) and Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs) for providing houses to all eligible families/ beneficiaries against the validated demand for houses for about 1.12 cr. PMAY(U) has made a mandatory provision for the female head of the family to be the owner or co-owner of the house under this Mission. A basket of options is adopted to ensure more number of people depending on their income, finance and availability of land through following four options.1. “In-situ” Slum Redevelopment (ISSR)2. Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS)3. Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP)4. Beneficiary-led individual house construction/enhancements (BLC)

CC
Under Slum redevelopment Central Assistance of Rs.1 lakh per house is admissible for all houses built for eligible slum dwellers under the component of In-situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) using land as Resource with participation of private developers. This slum rehabilitation grants can be utilised by States/UTs for any of the slum redevelopment projects. After redevelopment, de-notification of slums by State/UT Government is recommended under the Mission guidelines.

What is Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS)?
Interest Subsidy up to 2.67 lakh per house is admissible for Beneficiaries of Economically Weaker Section (EWS)/Low Income Group (LIG), Middle Income Group (MIG)-I and Middle Income Group (MIG)-II seeking housing loans from Banks, Housing Finance Companies and other such institutions for acquiring/constructing houses. The interest subsidies of 6.5%, 4% and 3% on loan amount up to Rs. 6 lakh, Rs. 9 lakh and Rs. 12 lakh are admissible for a house with carpet area of up to 60, 160 and 200 Sq.Meter for EWS/LIG, MIG I and MIG II respectively.The benefit for EWS/LIG beneficiaries under CLSS works out to as high as Rs. 6 lakh over a loan period of 20 years.

What is Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP)?
Central Assistance of Rs.1.5 Lakh per EWS house is provided by Government of India in projects where at least 35% of the houses in the projects are for EWS category and a single project has at least 250 houses.
