What is Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban) and its objectives and scope?
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban) for ensuring housing for all in urban areas was launched on 25th June 2015 providing pucca houses to all eligible beneficiaries by 2022. The Mission provides Central Assistance to implementing agencies through States/Union Territories (UTs) and Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs) for providing houses to all eligible families/ beneficiaries against the validated demand for houses for about 1.12 cr. PMAY(U) has made a mandatory provision for the female head of the family to be the owner or co-owner of the house under this Mission. A basket of options is adopted to ensure more number of people depending on their income, finance and availability of land through following four options.
1. “In-situ” Slum Redevelopment (ISSR)
2. Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS)
3. Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP)
4. Beneficiary-led individual house construction/enhancements (BLC)

What is In-Situ Slum Redevelopment?
Under Slum redevelopment Central Assistance of Rs.1 lakh per house is admissible for all houses built for eligible slum dwellers under the component of In-situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) using land as Resource with participation of private developers. This slum rehabilitation grants can be utilised by States/UTs for any of the slum redevelopment projects. After redevelopment, de-notification of slums by State/UT Government is recommended under the Mission guidelines.

What is Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS)?
Interest Subsidy up to 2.67 lakh per house is admissible for Beneficiaries of Economically Weaker Section (EWS)/Low Income Group (LIG), Middle Income Group (MIG)-I and Middle Income Group (MIG)-II seeking housing loans from Banks, Housing Finance Companies and other such institutions for acquiring/constructing houses. The interest subsidies of 6.5%, 4% and 3% on loan amount up to Rs. 6 lakh, Rs. 9 lakh and Rs. 12 lakh are admissible for a house with carpet area of up to 60, 160 and 200 Sq.Meter for EWS/LIG, MIG I and MIG II respectively.The benefit for EWS/LIG beneficiaries under CLSS works out to as high as Rs. 6 lakh over a loan period of 20 years.

What is Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP)?
Central Assistance of Rs.1.5 Lakh per EWS house is provided by Government of India in projects where at least 35% of the houses in the projects are for EWS category and a single project has at least 250 houses.

What is Beneficiary led individual house construction enhancements (BLC)?
Under this component, Central Assistance of Rs.1.5 lakh is available to individual eligible families belonging to EWS categories to either construct new houses or enhance existing houses on their own to cover the beneficiaries who are not able to take advantage of any other component of the Mission.
If the beneficiary has a pucca house with carpet area of up to 21 sq. mt. area or a semi-pucca house, lacking in one of the facilities- i.e. room, kitchen, toilet, bath or a combination of these, it may be taken up for enhancement subject to ULB/State ensuring structural safety of the house and adherence to following conditions:
• The total carpet area after enhancement must not be less than 21 sq. mt and must not be more than 30 sq. mt.
• Enhancement shall mean addition of minimum carpet area of 9.0 square meters in to the existing house with pucca construction of at least one habitable room or room with kitchen and/or bathroom and/or toilet conforming to NBC norms.

Who is defined as a beneficiary under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban) Scheme?
• A beneficiary is defined as a family comprising of husband, wife and unmarried children. Such beneficiary should not own a pucca house either in his / her name or in the name of any member of his / her family in any part of India to receive Central Assistance under the Mission.
• Person having pucca house less than 21 sqm may be included under enhancement of existing house
• Adult earning member irrespective of marital status are also eligible
• EWS category of beneficiaries is eligible for Assistance in all four verticals of the Missions whereas LIG/MIG category is eligible under only CLSS component of the Mission

Who are the nodal agencies who will be operating or responsible for disbursal of the subsidy under Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS)?
NHB, HUDCO and SBI have been identified as Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs) to channelize this subsidy to the lending institutions and for monitoring the progress of this component. Ministry may notify other Institutions as CNA in future.

Any preferential treatment to beneficiaries proposed for Affordable Housing?
Preference under the Scheme will be given to Manual Scavengers, Women (with overriding preference to widows), persons belonging to Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes/ Other Backward Classes, Minorities, Persons with disabilities and Transgenders subject to beneficiaries being from EWS / LIG segments.

What happens where a beneficiary having availed housing loans from one of the PLIs and also benefit under CLSS switches over to another PLI for taking advantage of the reduced interest rate?
A beneficiary who has taken a housing loan and availed of interest subvention under the scheme but later on switches to another PLI for balance transfer will not be eligible or claim the benefit of interest subvention again. Beneficiary can claim interest linked subsidy on only one loan account.


