What is PMAY-U 2.0?
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Urban 2.0 (PMAY-U 2.0) aims at providing Central Assistance to 1 crore eligible families/beneficiaries through States/UTs/PLIs to construct, purchase or rent affordable houses in urban areas over a period of 5 years.

What would be the implementation period of PMAY-U 2.0?
The scheme will be implemented for a period of 5 years from 2024 to 2029.

How can States/UTs participate in PMAY-U 2.0?
States/UTs need to sign a MoA with the MoHUA, agreeing on implementation of reforms proposed under the scheme including formulation of Affordable Housing Policy institutionalizing incentives to be provided to the developers amongst others.    

What is the eligibility criteria for seeking benefit under the scheme?
Families belonging to EWS/LIG/MIG segments, living in urban areas, having no pucca house either in his / her name or in the name of any member of his / her family anywhere in the country are eligible to purchase/construct or rent a house under PMAY 2.0.

Whether the curtailed beneficiary under PAMY-U, can avail the benefit under PMAY (U) 2.0?
NO, the houses sanctioned under PMAY-U which got curtailed by CSMC after 31.12.2023 due to any reason on the recommendation of States/UTs, houses will not be sanctioned in PMAY-U 2.0 to those beneficiaries. 

Can a beneficiary choose to get benefit from PMAY-G or PMAY-U if the territorial extant lies in verge of Urban or Rural areas?
Beneficiaries may avail benefits in either PMAY-G or PMAY-U 2.0, depending on their jurisdiction.
Further, beneficiaries may avail benefit in PMAY-G or PMAY-U 2.0 as per their jurisdiction. The MIS linkage between Department of Rural Development for PMAY(G) and MoHUA for PMAY(U) would be done to avoid duplication of beneficiaries. The final list may be checked before sending to CSMC.

What happens if I have availed benefits from housing schemes in the past?
Applicants who have availed benefits from any housing scheme of Central Govt., State Govt., or Local Self Govt. in the last 20 years will not be eligible for the Interest Subsidy Scheme.

What is the definition of a pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0?
A 'Pucca' house is defined as an all-weather dwelling unit having roof and wall are made up of sturdy, modern, and durable materials like burnt bricks, stones packed with cement or lime, cement concrete, timber, Galvanized Iron (GI) sheets, asbestos sheets, machine-made tiles etc. regardless of whether the floor is Kutcha 

What is the definition of beneficiary under the scheme?
A beneficiary is defined as a family comprising of husband, wife and unmarried children.

What is the definition of EWS, LIG and MIG for the purpose of the scheme?
EWS households are defined as households with an annual income up to ₹3 lakh. LIG households are defined as households with an annual income from ₹3 lakh up to ₹6 lakh. MIG households are defined as households with an annual income from ₹6 lakh up to ₹9 lakh. 

What are the basic facilities provided in a pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0?
A pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0 will mandatorily have basic facilities such as kitchen, toilet, electricity and water connection. 

Areas covered under PMAY-U 2.0
PMAY-U 2.0 covers all statutory towns as per Census 2011 and towns notified subsequently. It also includes Notified Planning Areas and areas within the jurisdiction of Industrial Development Authorities, Special Area Development Authorities, Urban Development Authorities, or any such Authority under State legislation entrusted with urban planning and regulation functions.

Are newly notified towns included in PMAY-U 2.0?
Yes, towns notified during implementation period of PMAY-U 2.0 will also be included under the scheme based on gazette notifications of States/UTs with approval from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA).  

Is PMAY-U 2.0 focussing on any special group of beneficiaries? 
Yes, the scheme also focusses on special groups such as Safai Karmi, Street Vendors identified under Pradhan Mantri Street Vendor's AtmaNirbhar Nidhi (PMSVANidhi) Scheme and different artisans under Pradhan Mantri-Vishwakarma Scheme, Anganwadi Workers, Building and other Construction Workers (BoCW), slum dwellers/chawls and other groups identified during operation of the scheme. 

Whether scheme will provide preferences to any social group? 
Yes, preference under the scheme will also be given to manual scavengers, widows, Persons with Disabilities, Transgenders, persons belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, and Minorities.

What are the different verticals implemented in the scheme?


