



Table of Contents
About the Scheme	2
Beneficiary Led Construction (BLC)	6
Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP)	10
Affordable Rental Housing	13
Interest Subsidy Scheme	17
TIG (Technology & Innovation Sub-Mission)	22
Financial assistance under the scheme	24




About the Scheme
1. What is PMAY-U 2.0?
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Urban 2.0 (PMAY-U 2.0) aims at providing Central Assistance to 1 crore eligible families/beneficiaries through States/UTs/PLIs to construct, purchase or rent affordable houses in urban areas over a period of 5 years.

2. What would be the implementation period of PMAY-U 2.0?
The scheme will be implemented for a period of 5 years from 2024 to 2029.

3. How can States/UTs participate in PMAY-U 2.0?
States/UTs need to sign a MoA with the MoHUA, agreeing on implementation of reforms proposed under the scheme including formulation of Affordable Housing Policy institutionalizing incentives to be provided to the developers amongst others.    

4. What is the eligibility criteria for seeking benefit under the scheme?
Families belonging to EWS/LIG/MIG segments, living in urban areas, having no pucca house either in his / her name or in the name of any member of his / her family anywhere in the country are eligible to purchase/construct or rent a house under PMAY 2.0.

5. Whether the curtailed beneficiary under PAMY-U, can avail the benefit under PMAY (U) 2.0?
NO, the houses sanctioned under PMAY-U which got curtailed by CSMC after 31.12.2023 due to any reason on the recommendation of States/UTs, houses will not be sanctioned in PMAY-U 2.0 to those beneficiaries. 

6. Can a beneficiary choose to get benefit from PMAY-G or PMAY-U if the territorial extant lies in verge of Urban or Rural areas? 
Beneficiaries may avail benefits in either PMAY-G or PMAY-U 2.0, depending on their jurisdiction.

Further, beneficiaries may avail benefit in PMAY-G or PMAY-U 2.0 as per their jurisdiction. The MIS linkage between Department of Rural Development for PMAY(G) and MoHUA for PMAY(U) would be done to avoid duplication of beneficiaries. The final list may be checked before sending to CSMC.

7. What happens if I have availed benefits from housing schemes in the past?
Applicants who have availed benefits from any housing scheme of Central Govt., State Govt., or Local Self Govt. in the last 20 years will not be eligible for the Interest Subsidy Scheme.

8. What is the definition of a pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0?
A 'Pucca' house is defined as an all-weather dwelling unit having roof and wall are made up of sturdy, modern, and durable materials like burnt bricks, stones packed with cement or lime, cement concrete, timber, Galvanized Iron (GI) sheets, asbestos sheets, machine-made tiles etc. regardless of whether the floor is Kutcha 
9. What is the definition of beneficiary under the scheme?
A beneficiary is defined as a family comprising of husband, wife and unmarried children.

10. What is the definition of EWS, LIG and MIG for the purpose of the scheme?
         EWS households are defined as households with an annual income up to ?3 lakh. LIG households are defined as households with an annual income from ?3 lakh up to ?6 lakh. MIG households are defined as households with an annual income from ?6 lakh up to ?9 lakh. 
11. What are the basic facilities provided in a pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0?
A pucca house under PMAY-U 2.0 will mandatorily have basic facilities such as kitchen, toilet, electricity and water connection. 

12. Areas covered under PMAY-U 2.0
PMAY-U 2.0 covers all statutory towns as per Census 2011 and towns notified subsequently. It also includes Notified Planning Areas and areas within the jurisdiction of Industrial Development Authorities, Special Area Development Authorities, Urban Development Authorities, or any such Authority under State legislation entrusted with urban planning and regulation functions.

13. Are newly notified towns included in PMAY-U 2.0?
Yes, towns notified during implementation period of PMAY-U 2.0 will also be included under the scheme based on gazette notifications of States/UTs with approval from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA).  

['Answer: Yes, newly notified towns are included in PMAY-U 2.0. According to the guidelines, "The scheme is applicable to all the statutory cities/towns/villages/ hamlets as per the latest Census data available and notified by MoHUA." Therefore, any newly notified towns after the release of the guidelines would also be eligible for benefits under PMAY-U 2.0.']



14. Is PMAY-U 2.0 focussing on any special group of beneficiaries? 
Yes, the scheme also focusses on special groups such as Safai Karmi, Street Vendors identified under Pradhan Mantri Street Vendor's AtmaNirbhar Nidhi (PMSVANidhi) Scheme and different artisans under Pradhan Mantri-Vishwakarma Scheme, Anganwadi Workers, Building and other Construction Workers (BoCW), slum dwellers/chawls and other groups identified during operation of the scheme. 

15. Whether scheme will provide preferences to any social group? 
Yes, preference under the scheme will also be given to manual scavengers, widows, Persons with Disabilities, Transgenders, persons belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, and Minorities.

16. What are the different verticals implemented in the scheme?
The PMAY-U 2.0 will be implemented through four verticals as under:
i. Beneficiary Led Construction (BLC)
ii. Affordable Housing in Partnership (AHP)
iii. Affordable Rental Housing (ARH)
iv. Interest Subsidy Scheme (ISS)
17. How to choose a vertical to avail scheme benefits?
The Beneficiaries can choose from any one of the four verticals of the Scheme with the help of State/UTs/ULBs/PLIs or by submitting online application or by participating in the rapid assessment. 
18. How beneficiary can apply for the housing support under the scheme?
The beneficiaries meeting the eligibility criteria defined under the scheme, may submit the application in defined format through online portal of the PMAY-U 2.0, Common Service Centres or by visiting the concerned Urban Local Bodies/Municipalities they are residing in. 

19. What documents needs to be submitted along with the application form under the scheme?
The beneficiary need to submit copy of their Adhar Card, bank account details, undertaking for meeting eligibility criteria as per prescribed format, land ownership documents in case of BLC or any other documents specified by the States/UTs.     

20. What is the house size under various verticals of PMAY-U 2.0?
The Scheme will support construction of houses of not less than 30 square meter (sqm) carpet area along with basic infrastructure. Houses upto 45 sqm, 60 sqm, 120 sqm will be supported under BLC/AHP, ARH, ISS verticals respectively. 

21. What is carpet area? 
The area enclosed within the walls, actual area to lay the carpet. This area does not include the thickness of the inner walls. 
22. How is the housing demand assessed under PMAY-U 2.0?
Cities will undertake a rapid assessment of housing demand through suitable means in both online and offline modes. During the demand survey cities shall include all eligible beneficiaries including the special focus groups.
23. What is the City Wise Plan?
The city-wise plan will have total and annual housing demand of eligible beneficiaries in the city, including details of special focus group beneficiaries and the selected interventions from the three verticals.
24. How does PMAY-U 2.0 aim to enhance housing affordability?
PMAY-U 2.0 aims to enhance housing affordability for EWS, LIG, and MIG segments by providing financial assistance and support, making it easier for eligible urban families to construct/purchase/rent a house.
25. How Women empowerment is promoted under the scheme?
The scheme guidelines mandate ownership of the house to be in the name of female head of the household or in joint ownership with the male member. 

26. What is difference in Central Sector Scheme and Centrally Sponsored Scheme?
Central Sector Scheme are 100% funded by the Union government and implemented by the Central Government machinery. In Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) a certain percentage of the funding is borne by the States and the implementation is by the State Governments.

27. How is the scheme of PMAY-U 2.0 monitored at ground level?
The scheme will be monitored by Unified Web Portal/Management Information System (MIS) developed in the Scheme. 
      
28. What function will MIS have under PMAY-U2.0?
The MIS of PMAY-U 2.0 will be used to monitor and evaluate the scheme which will be accessible to all stakeholders such as States/UTs/ULBs/PLIs etc. It will have a real-time progress on key performance indicators, dashboards, and analytics to enable informed decision-making by program managers and policymakers. The MIS will have the facility for the beneficiaries to apply and track their application status on real-time basis.
Beneficiary Led Construction-BLC
1. What is Beneficiary Led Construction (BLC)? 
This vertical of the scheme shall provide assistance to individual eligible families belonging to EWS category to construct new houses on their own available vacant land.

2. What is the funding mechanism under the BLC vertical?
The cost of house construction shall be shared among Ministry, State/UT/ULB and identified eligible beneficiaries. The Central Assistance proposed along with State/UT share under BLC is as under:
State/UT
Central Govt.
State/UT Govt.
North-Eastern Region States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Union Territory (UT) of J&K, Puducherry and Delhi
?2.25 Lakh
Min ?0.25 Lakh
All other UTs
?2.50 Lakh
-
Remaining States
?1.50 Lakh
Min ?1 Lakh

3. How will Central Assistance be released under the BLC vertical?
Central Assistance will be released directly through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) to the bank accounts of beneficiaries of BLC component in three instalments 40:40:20 identified in projects through States/UTs.

4. How one can avail the benefits under BLC vertical?
Or
What is the process to apply for a house under BLC vertical?
Beneficiaries desirous of availing the assistance under this vertical shall approach the ULBs/Implementing Agencies/Unified web portal, with necessary documents, including ownership proof of land owned by them. 

5. What are the documents required for availing of benefits under the BLC vertical?
Beneficiaries desirous of availing the assistance under this vertical shall approach the ULBs/Implementing Agencies/Unified web portal, with necessary documents, including 
a. Proof of Identity (Aadhaar card, PAN, voter ID, Passport etc.)
b. Proof of address (ration card, utility bills, etc.)
c. Income certificate
d. Land ownership documents
e. An affidavit stating the beneficiary does not own a pucca house


6. What are the norms for constructing a house under BLC vertical?
The beneficiaries under this vertical may be allowed to construct the all-weather pucca house of 30-45 sqm. carpet area for EWS and should conform to the building safety and design standards provided in National Building Code (NBC).
7. What are the basic facilities provided in a pucca house under BLC vertical?
A pucca house constructed under BLC vertical of PMAY-U 2.0 will mandatorily have basic facilities such as kitchen, toilet, electricity and water connection.

8. Can slum dwellers avail the benefits under BLC?
In case, a tenable slum in any ULB has a requirement of pucca house, the State/UT Government can propose the projects/list of those eligible beneficiaries for sanctioning of Central Assistance under BLC vertical.

9. How a landless beneficiary construct a house under the BLC vertical?
In the case of landless beneficiaries, States/UTs at their expense may provision heritable, but non-transferable land rights (pattas) to the family, making them eligible under the BLC vertical.

10. What is the process for approval of houses under BLC vertical?
On receipt of applications from citizen/ULB/CSC via unified web portal, the ULBs will prepare projects for such beneficiaries in accordance with the city-wise plans. This should be approved by the State Level Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (SLSMC) at State/UT level and to be submitted to Central Sanction and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) for final approval. 

11. What are the pre-requisite for considering beneficiaries under BLC vertical?
The States/UTs/ULBs should ensure that the required finance for constructing a planned house under this vertical is available with the beneficiary.

12. What will be the State and beneficiary contribution for availing the house under the BLC vertical of the scheme?
The State is mandatorily required to provide their minimum share corresponding to the central share and the remaining cost for construction of the house will be borne by the beneficiary.


13. Can the State release funds to the beneficiaries after approval of projects from the Central Government ?
Yes, States/UTs may release the first installment of financial assistance to eligible beneficiaries approved by SLSMC/CSMC, from their share without waiting for the Central Assistance so that the work on ground may be started.

14. What is the role of ULB in implementing the BLC vertical ?
The ULB is responsible for identifying/verifying eligible beneficiaries, preparing and submitting list of eligible beneficiaries for approval in SLSMC and CSMC. Additionally, monitoring and ensuring the timely completion of houses, disbursing funds to beneficiaries based on construction milestones are the responsibilities of ULBs.


15. Can innovative construction materials and techniques also be used in construction of BLC houses?
States/UTs are advised to create awareness among the beneficiaries on the use of innovative construction materials and techniques which would enhance the thermal comfort, energy efficiency and disaster resilience in a house.

16. Can beneficiaries under the BLC component avail of a loan for construction?
Yes, beneficiaries can avail of a loan from banks or housing finance companies in addition to the central assistance provided under the BLC component but they would not be eligible for subsidy under ISS vertical of the scheme.

17. How is the progress of BLC projects monitored?
The Monitoring mechanisms include Monthly Financial and physical progress reports as submitted by ULBs/implementing agencies/SLNAs. The periodic inspections by State/UT officials at ground level along with the review meetings by the SLSMC will also be convened. Further, the progress of houses will be tracked through Geo-tagging at various stages and other digital norms so that each house can be monitored effectively at every stage of construction. 

18. How many construction stages of a house is required to be captured in geo-tagging?

The Geo-tagging of houses will be done in minimum 3 construction stages as per the payment plan. The number of Geo-tagging stages may be increased as per the requirements of State/UT Government. 

19. Is Geotagging of houses under BLC vertical allowed by the beneficiary?
The beneficiaries shall also be allowed to Geo-tag the progress of the houses through the applicable modalities and subsequently, the ULB authorities shall monitor and approve the Geo-tagging status of the house as captured by the beneficiary for subsequent release of funds. The ULB will be required to approve the geo-tagging as captured by the beneficiary with in 15 days of uploading failing which the geo-tagging will be auto approved by the system.


Affordable Housing in Partnership-AHP

1. How many models are implemented under AHP vertical?
AHP is a supply side intervention adopting two models:
i. AHP by public sector agencies and parastatals
ii. Private Sector AHP Projects
2. What is the funding mechanism under the AHP vertical by public sector agency and parastatals ?
The cost of house construction shall be shared among Ministry, State/UT/ULB and identified eligible beneficiaries. The Central Assistance proposed along with State/UT share under AHP is as under:
State/UT
Central Govt.
State/UT Govt.
North-Eastern Region States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Union Territory (UT) of J&K, Puducherry and Delhi
?2.25 Lakh
Min ?0.25 Lakh
All other UTs
?2.50 Lakh
-
Remaining States
?1.50 Lakh
Min ?1 Lakh

3. How the prices of EWS houses be decided under AHP vertical?
The States/UTs can decide on the upper ceiling of the sale price for EWS houses in rupees per square meter of carpet area. This makes such projects affordable and accessible to intended beneficiaries. 

4. What are the key factors to be considered for AHP by Public Sector Agencies and Parastatals? 
Submission of encumbrance free ownership document of land is the prerequisite for the approval of AHP projects. The agency has to prepare the DPR for AHP projects which should be comprehensive in nature and shall mandatorily include housing as well as all infrastructure related provision.  

5. What is the minimum number of EWS houses to be built in a mixed housing project?
An Affordable Housing Project can be a mix of houses for different categories with at least 100 houses. However, it will be eligible for Central Assistance, only if at least 25% of the houses in the project are earmarked for the EWS category.
6. Who will provide the trunk infrastructure in AHP projects?
States/UTs through their implementing agencies will provide trunk infrastructure from their resources up to project site. 

7. Can housing projects for tenable slums be taken up in AHP vertical?
Yes, under AHP vertical, States/UTs may also propose redevelopment or in-situ improvement projects for tenable slums having dilapidated buildings located on Government/ULB/Public land. Under this, the existing slum will be demolished and redeveloped in the form of multi-storied building with all basic amenities and social infrastructure.

8. Can housing projects for untenable slums be taken up in AHP vertical?
Yes, the State/UT may also propose projects for resettlement of "Untenable slums" which are located on environmentally hazardous sites to appropriate sites by constructing new housing colonies/group houses in alternate land with access to all basic amenities and infrastructure. 
9. After slum development, does it also have to be de-notified?
Yes, all slums developed under AHP vertical would be compulsorily de-notified by States/UTs.
10. What is the procedure to be followed for allotment of houses?
Allotment of houses to identified eligible beneficiaries in AHP projects should be made through a transparent procedure as approved by SLSMC. Preference in allotment should be given to the beneficiaries of special focus group as defined in the scheme guidelines. 

11. Can the beneficiary sell the house owned under AHP projects?
No, the beneficiary will not be able to sell a house as these houses will have a mandatory lock-in period of minimum 5 years from the date of allotment.

12. What process will be adopted for approval of private sector AHP projects?
The States/UTs/ULB shall whitelist the private sector projects as per the checklist and after approval of SLSMC and CSMC. Afterwards, it will be eligible for incentives.

13. What are the proposed incentives for Public/Private entities?
To encourage participation of Public/Private entities, incentives on following lines by the State Government, are being proposed:
i. Single Window time bound approval of building plans and layouts with minimal compliances devising a green channel approach. 
ii. 50% additional FAR, with TDR facility free of cost, and built-up area used for EWS/LIG, not to be counted in overall FAR of the project. 
iii. Exemption of charges in Land Conversion/Land Use changes. 
iv. Exemption of all statutory charges such as developmental charges, scrutiny charges, layout deposit and other related charges. 
v. 100% exemption of income tax on profit/income accrued from AHP projects. 
vi. Input tax credit on GST for AHP projects.
14. How much additional Grant is provisioned in AHP projects for using innovative construction technology?
Projects using innovative construction technologies notified by MoHUA shall be eligible for an additional Grant in the form of Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) @?1000 per sqm on built up area (including internal infrastructure) for 30 sqm. per unit to the implementing agencies under AHP vertical.
15. How Central Assistance will be released for Private Sector AHP Projects?
Under this AHP vertical, the Central Assistance shall be provided to the beneficiaries of EWS categories in the form of Redeemable Housing Vouchers (RHV) for purchase of a house from the whitelisted private projects in PMAY-U 2.0. 

16. How will beneficiaries get houses in private sector AHP projects?
The eligible EWS beneficiaries may purchase a house in whitelisted private projects from the open-market and redeem their housing vouchers. 


Affordable Rental Housing-ARH
1. What is the purpose of Affordable Rental Housing (ARH) ?
ARH vertical aims to ensure affordable and hygienic living spaces for urban dwellers who do not want to own a house but require housing for short term basis or those who do not have the financial capability to construct/buy a house. 

2. How will ARH be implemented?
This vertical will be implemented through two models as under:
i. Model-1: Utilizing existing Government funded vacant houses in cities by converting them into ARH under PPP mode or by public agencies.
ii. Model-2: Construct, Operate and Maintain rental housing by Private/Public Entities for employees of Industries, Industrial Estates, Institutions, and Associations etc.

3. Who are the targeted beneficiaries under ARH vertical?
ARH vertical will create adequate rental housing for beneficiaries of EWS/LIG category including urban migrants/ homeless/destitute/ industrial workers/ working women/ single women/construction workers/ students/ long-term tourists/ contractual employees/ professionals, among others. 
4. Is there any provision for short term accommodation in the city for a migrant person/family?
Yes, the MoHUA has launched a vertical named Affordable Rental Housing (ARH) under PMAY-U 2.0 to provide rental houses through affordable rents to urban migrants/poor.

5. How will citizens looking for rental accommodation come to know about ARH?
Tenants/aggregators would be able to get the status of occupancy along with location of ARH on MoHUA's website.

6. What documents will be needed by the tenants to get a house under ARH?
Aadhaar or any other Govt. approved identification documents will be mandatorily required for allotment in ARH and allotment letter for single bedroom/ double bedroom/ dormitories issued by the implementing agency i.e. ULBs/Entities/ Concessionaires. 

7. How long can tenants stay in ARH?
The tenants can stay as per the mutual agreement with Concessionaire/Entity subject to the compliance and conditions mentioned in Agreement/scheme guidelines.

8. Will students be able to get accommodation under ARH?
Yes, students can get accommodations in ARH, who belong to EWS/LIG categories.

9. Can a group of persons with specialised skills such as shoe making, tailoring, catering etc. avail accommodation under ARH?
Yes, however ARH shall only be used for residential purpose and no commercial activities shall be allowed.

10. What will be the rent under ARH vertical? 
Initially, affordable rent of ARH projects will be fixed by the local authority based on a local survey. Subsequently, rent will be enhanced biennially by 8%, subject to maximum increase of 20% in aggregate, over a period of 5 years, effective from the date of signing the contract.

11. Which law and act will govern ARH?
In order to safeguard the interest of stakeholders and avoid conflict/complication, ARH will be kept outside the purview of existing State Rental Laws by States/ UTs. ARH shall be governed by Model Tenancy Act (MTA) or modification of their existing laws in the line of MTA for speedy resolution.


12. Who will manage the projects under Model-1 of ARH vertical?
Under this Model, States/UTs may rent out the houses which are lying vacant and unutilized by making them livable for migrants/poor through repair/retrofitting along with necessary civic infrastructure facilities by themselves or through a Concessionaire.

13. Who is a Concessionaire?
Concessionaire is a Public/Private agency, organization, industrial body/ association, institution implementing ARH under Model- 1.

14. How will a concessionaire be selected?
Concessionaire will be selected by the concerned ULB/parastatals  through a transparent bidding process based on the model RFP (tender document) circulated by MoHUA.

15. What would be the responsibilities of a concessionaire?
Concessionaire would invest in making vacant houses liveable by repair/retrofit the rooms/buildings and filling up internal infrastructure gaps like water, sewer/septage, sanitation, internal roads etc. in the ARH projects.

16. What kind of infrastructure is provided under Model-1 of ARH vertical?
The State/UT Governments shall ensure that all civic infrastructure gaps like water, sewer/ septage, sanitation, internal road etc. are addressed to make it liveable. The necessary Social Infrastructure (e.g. health centers, Anganwadi, creche, community centers etc.) and Neighbourhood Commercial facilities (e.g. shops, grocery store, medical shops, milk booths, ATM etc.) within the campus may also be developed.


17. Who will be the eligible beneficiaries under Model -2 of ARH vertical? 
Public/Private Entities may use these rental houses to provide accommodation for their own employees/workers as well as serve the requirement of neighboring industries or may use them as rental to other eligible beneficiaries. 

18. What kind of accommodation is provided under Model -2 of ARH vertical? 
ARH constructed through this model will consist of a mix of Dwelling Units (DUs) (upto 60 sqm carpet area)/and Dormitories of 4/6 beds including all common facilities conforming to the requirement of National Building Code (NBC) and State/Local Authority norms.
19. What are the basic civic infrastructure facilities should have under Model -2 of ARH vertical? 
ARH projects should have basic civic infrastructure facilities like water, sanitation, sewerage/septage, drainage, road, electricity etc. including necessary social/commercial infrastructure. Project design may include innovative system of rainwater harvesting, waste management including wastewater treatment, renewable resources with special focus on solar energy.


20. Is there any Central Assistance under Model-2 of ARH vertical?
MoHUA has provisioned a central assistance in the form of Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) for the project using innovative & alternate technology for speedier, sustainable, resource efficient and disaster resilient construction. MoHUA shall release TIG at the rate of ?3,000 per sqm on built up area for upto 60 sqm (including internal infrastructure) and State/UT Government shall release ?2000/Sqm as part of State Share under ARH vertical.

21. How Central Assistance will be released under ARH vertical of scheme?
Central assistance in the form of TIG will be released by MoHUA in two instalments at the ratio of 50:50. First instalment of 50% will be released on approval of project by CSMC and second and final instalment of 50% will be released based on utilization of 100% of earlier instalment and commensurate physical and financial progress in prescribed format and submission of Completion Certificate of respective projects.


22. What are the proposed incentives for Public/Private entities under ARH?
To encourage participation of Public/Private entities, incentives on following lines by the State Government, are being proposed:
i. Single Window time bound approval of building plans and layouts with minimal compliances devising a green channel approach. 
ii. 50% additional FAR, with TDR facility free of cost, and built-up area used for EWS/LIG, not to be counted in overall FAR of the project. 
iii. Exemption of charges in Land Conversion/Land Use changes. 
iv. Exemption of all statutory charges such as developmental charges, scrutiny charges, layout deposit and other related charges. 
v. 100% exemption of income tax on profit/income accrued from ARH projects. 
vi. GST on ARH projects to be treated at par with affordable housing.


Interest Subsidy Scheme-ISS
1. What is Interest Subsidy Scheme (ISS)? 
The ISS vertical of PMAY 2.0 scheme will provide benefits of subsidy on home loans for EWS/LIG and MIG families. 

2. How much subsidy is permissible under this vertical?
Or
What are the provisions regarding loan and subsidy in the scheme?

Beneficiaries of EWS/LIG and MIG will be eligible for 4% interest subsidy on first ?8 lakh loan up to 12 years tenure. A maximum of ?1.80 lakh subsidy (maximum NPV ?1.50 lakh) will be given to eligible beneficiaries in 5 yearly instalments provided loan is standard as well as live at the time of release of subsidy and more than 50% principal is outstanding.

3. Who is eligible to apply for the Interest Subsidy Scheme?
Eligibility criteria typically include annual Household Income:
* EWS (Economically Weaker Section): = ?3 Lakh
* LIG (Lower Income Group): = ?6 Lakh
* MIG (Middle Income Group): = ?9 Lakh
Applicants must not have a pucca house anywhere in India.
4. What documents are required to apply for the Interest Subsidy Scheme?
      Documents may include:
* Proof of identity (Aadhaar card, PAN card, Driving licence, Passport , Ration card etc.)
* Proof of address
* Income certificate
* Any other documents as specified by the MoHUA portal or the Primary Lending Institution (PLI)
* Home loan details as per the prescribed requirements

5. How should beneficiary approach to take home loan and apply for interest subsidy?
a. The beneficiary may approach identified PLIs (Bank/HFCs) branch to take home loan for construction/purchase of a new house.
b. Once home loan is sanctioned, the beneficiary may visit the PMAY-U 2.0 website/App and choose ISS vertical to directly apply for subsidy. 
c. The details filled by the beneficiary will be verified with the PLI.
d. Upon successful verification, the beneficiary will be intimated and applicable subsidy will be disbursed as per scheme guidelines. 


6. Is there a requirement of approved layout plans in order to claim the subsidy?
Yes. The subsidy will be given to those beneficiaries who have submitted the approved layout plan as per guidelines of States/UTs. The layout plan may not be insisted where States/UTs have given the exemption for construction of houses having provision of deemed approval or pre-approved building plan by the competent authority is submitted by the beneficiary.

7. How one can check the eligibility for the Interest Subsidy Scheme?
Yes one can check the eligibility by visiting the integrated portal of MoHUA by entering details such as annual household income, housing loan value, house value, and other required information. The portal will verify the eligibility based on the specified criteria.
8. How will I know if I am eligible for ISS?
Following parameters will be considered for eligibility under ISS
i. Undertaking on not owning a house anywhere in India except for the one being acquired/constructed
ii. Declaration on not availing benefit under any housing schemes in last 20 years
iii. Household income is not exceeding ?9 lakh per annum
iv. Home loan is not more than ?25 lakh 
v. House value is not more than ?35 lakh
vi. Carpet area of the house is not more than 120sqm

9. How loan subsidy will be released to the beneficiary?
Subsidy will be released in 5 yearly instalments through DBT in loan accounts provided loan is live at the time of release of subsidy and more than 50% principal is outstanding.

10. Can a beneficiary take a loan below 12 years and still be eligible for taking the subsidy?
Yes, but the tenure of the loan should be at least 5 years to be eligible for taking the subsidy.

11. Will processing fee be exempted from PLIs for applying Home Loan under ISS vertical?
PLIs will not take any processing charge from the beneficiary for housing loans up to the eligible loan amount as per income criteria under the Scheme.

12. Who will pay the processing fee for housing loan under ISS vertical?
The processing fee for housing loan on behalf of the eligible beneficiaries will be given to PLIs as a lump sum amount of ?4,000 (Rupees Four Thousand only) for EWS/ LIG and MIG beneficiaries per sanctioned application as per income criteria under the Scheme.  For additional loan amounts beyond the eligible loan amounts, PLIs can charge the normal processing fee.

13. Can I check my application status after applying for the benefit under the ISS vertical?
The applicant can check their application status by using their unique user code/Application ID/registered mobile number by visiting website or through mobile application. The Ministry shall send communication to applicant through SMS/email at every stage. The applicant will be able to know the status of their application such as registration, due-diligence, approval of claim, Beneficiary ID generation and subsidy release date and amount etc.

14. Does generation of Application ID confirm that one will receive the subsidy? 
No, Application ID is only generated for the beneficiary to apply for subsidy. After due-diligence and approval a Beneficiary ID is generated which shall allow the beneficiary to claim the subsidy. A SMS with Beneficiary ID shall be shared with the beneficiary, which he/she may use to follow up every year for tracking the credit of their subsidy in their bank account.

15. How will I know the status of my subsidy under ISS?
The applicant can check their status for release of subsidy by using their unique user code/Application ID/ registered mobile number by visiting website or accessing through mobile application. 

16. Under what circumstances a subsidy be denied to an active loan account of the beneficiary?
	The subsidy for a beneficiary shall not be released if,
a. Loan account is NPA 
b. Less than 50% principal loan amount is outstanding 

17. What is the benefit of taking the subsidy?
Or
Does the PMAY subsidy reduce the principal amount?
The subsidy will be credited directly into the home loan account of the beneficiary and the principal outstanding shall be reduced proportionately to the subsidy amount credited. This shall result in reduced EMI/loan tenure. 

18. Is the subsidy amount fixed or is it dependent on Loan Amount?
Subsidy amount is not fixed and it is depended on the loan amount.  However, maximum Interest Subsidy limit is permissible upto ? 1.80 lakh only for loan amount of ?8 lakh given for a tenure of 12 years. In case if the loan amount is below ?8 lakh then the subsidy amount shall be reduced and calculated on pro-rate basis. It may also be noted that, one may take loan above ?8 lakh to maximum ?25 lakh, but the subsidy will not be granted for loans above ?8 lakh. 


19. What is the maximum amount of loan and maximum house price allowed to be purchased for qualifying for subsidy? 
Only loans up to ?25 lakh and house value up to ?35 lakh will be eligible for subsidy under this vertical. This is applicable for Metro and Non-Metro cities. 

20. What is the permissible carpet area of ??the house under ISS vertical?
The carpet area of houses under this component shall be up to 120 sqm for EWS/LIG and MIG.


21. Will I get loan for purchasing a land for building house for claiming subsidy under ISS? 
No, subsidy will not be provided for purchasing a land. 

22. I have a land and I want to take loan for construction of house on my property. Am I Eligible to take the subsidy? 
 Yes, provide the carpet area of the house should not be greater than 120 sqm.

23. Is the subsidy applicable for repair work or incremental construction activity such as addition of kitchen, bathroom etc on an existing property? 
No, the subsidy is not applicable for repair work or incremental construction activity such as addition of kitchen, bathroom etc on an existing property.
 
24. Is ISS applicable for Rural areas?
No.

25. I am (single woman/man) unmarried and I want to take loan for purchase/construction of a house? Am I eligible for subsidy? 
Yes, provided you are the sole owner of the property, and you have taken loan alone. 


26. Who are the Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs)? 
Financial Institutions extending individual home loans to borrowers who have been listed by CNAs are termed as PLIs for the purpose of the scheme. 

27. Where PLIs list is available? 
The list of PLIs is available on PMAY-U 2.0 website and application login. Citizen may also directly enquire at nearest branch of a PLIs to check for availability of the facility.

28. I have a non-salaried income. will I be eligible to get the loan and subsidy?
Yes, Non-salaried workers such as Street vendor, small shop owners, service providers, drivers, watch man etc who are informally employed or have business provided meeting eligibility criteria of the scheme, will be eligible for loan subsidy.

29. How does one raise grievance in case of non-receipt of subsidy? 
In case, if subsidy is not released to the eligible beneficiaries then he/she can submit their representation of the issue by visiting the PMAY-U 2.0 website/App/CPGRAM portal of GoI. 
30. Can ISS be covered with CRGFTLIH to secure the loan default risk by the PLIs? 
Yes, loan disbursed under ISS vertical can be covered under CRGFTLIH by the PLIs.



Technology & Innovation Sub-Mission-TISM
1. What is Technology & Innovation Sub-Mission (TISM) and its aspects/features under PMAY (U) 2.0?
The Technology & Innovation Sub-Mission (TISM) set up under PMAY-U 2.0 to guide and facilitate States/UTs and other stakeholders in adoption of modern, innovative and green technologies and building material for faster and quality construction of houses. It will also assist States/UTs/Cities in deploying disaster resistant and environment friendly technologies for climate smart buildings and resilient housing. TISM will also facilitate preparation and adoption of layout designs and building plans suitable for various geo-climatic zones.

2. Will the Government collaborate with Research/Technology Institutes under TISM?
Centre/State/UT government would also partner with willing technical institutes such as IITs, NITs and Planning & Architecture institutes for developing technical solutions, capacity building and handholding of States and Cities.

3. Whether State or region-specific needs of technologies and designs would also be supported under TISM?
Yes, government will collaborate with regional institute working in the field of new and innovative construction technologies and successful projects will be promoted.
4. How much additional Grant is provisioned in AHP projects for using innovative construction technology?
Projects using innovative construction technologies notified by MoHUA shall be eligible for an additional Grant in the form of Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) @?1000 per sqm on built up area (including internal infrastructure) for 30 sqm. per unit to the implementing agencies under AHP vertical.

5. How much Grant is provisioned in Model-2 of ARH vertical using innovative construction technology?
MoHUA has provisioned a central assistance in the form of Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) for the project using innovative & alternate technology for speedier, sustainable, resource efficient and disaster resilient construction. MoHUA shall release TIG at the rate of ?3,000 per sqm on built up area for upto 60 sqm (including internal infrastructure) and State/UT Government shall release ?2000/Sqm as part of State Share under ARH vertical.


Financial assistance under the scheme
1. What is the funding mechanism under the BLC vertical?
The cost of house construction shall be shared among Ministry, State/UT/ULB and identified eligible beneficiaries. The Central Assistance proposed along with State/UT share under BLC is as under:
State/UT
Central Govt.
State/UT Govt.
North-Eastern Region States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Union Territory (UT) of J&K, Puducherry and Delhi
?2.25 Lakh
Min ?0.25 Lakh
All other UTs
?2.50 Lakh
-
Remaining States
?1.50 Lakh
Min ?1 Lakh
2. What is the funding mechanism under the AHP vertical by public sector agency and parastatals ?
The cost of house construction shall be shared among Ministry, State/UT/ULB and identified eligible beneficiaries. The Central Assistance proposed along with State/UT share under AHP is as under:
State/UT
Central Govt.
State/UT Govt.
North-Eastern Region States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Union Territory (UT) of J&K, Puducherry and Delhi
?2.25 Lakh
Min ?0.25 Lakh
All other UTs
?2.50 Lakh
-
Remaining States
?1.50 Lakh
Min ?1 Lakh

3. How Central Assistance will be released for Private Sector AHP Projects?
Under this AHP vertical, the Central Assistance shall be provided to the beneficiaries of EWS categories in the form of Redeemable Housing Vouchers (RHV) for purchase of a house from the whitelisted private projects in PMAY-U 2.0. 


4. Is there any Central Assistance under Model-2 of ARH vertical?
MoHUA has provisioned a central assistance in the form of Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) for the project using innovative & alternate technology for speedier, sustainable, resource efficient and disaster resilient construction. MoHUA shall release TIG at the rate of ?3,000 per sqm on built up area for up to 60 sqm (including internal infrastructure) and State/UT Government shall release ?2000/Sqm as part of State Share under ARH vertical.

5. How Central Assistance will be provisioned under ISS vertical of scheme?
Beneficiaries of EWS, LIG and MIG who has availed loan amount of up to ?25 lakh with house value up to ?35 lakh will be eligible for 4 percent interest subsidy on first ?8 lakh loan up to 12 years tenure. A maximum of ?1.80 lakh subsidy (maximum NPV ?1.5 lakh) will be given to eligible beneficiaries in 5 yearly instalments provided loan is live at the time of release of subsidy and more than 50% principal is outstanding.

6. Can the State release funds to the BLC beneficiaries after approval of projects from the Central Government?
Yes, States/UTs may release the first installment of financial assistance to eligible/approved beneficiaries under BLC by SLSMC/CSMC, from their share without waiting for the Central Assistance so that the work on ground may be started.

7. How will Central Assistance be released under the BLC component?
Central Assistance will be released directly through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) to the bank accounts of beneficiaries of BLC component in three instalments 40:40:20 identified in projects through States/UTs.

8. What will be the State and beneficiary contribution for availing the house under the scheme?
The State is mandatorily required to provide their share corresponding to the central share and the remaining cost for construction of the house will be borne by the beneficiary.

9. How State/UT can take Central assistance under the scheme?
After approval of projects by SLSMC/CSMC, the States/UTs will be eligible for release of central assistance in instalments as per the fulfilment of conditions as mentioned in the guidelines.

10. How a project would be approved by Central Government?
With the approval of SLSMC, the State/UTs shall propose the houses/projects of various cities through a verified list of eligible beneficiaries along with the valid land titles for approval of Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) at MoHUA. Each City shall propose the proposals/lists to CSMC once in every three months for sanctioning of Central Assistance.


11. How much additional Grant is provisioned in AHP projects for using innovative construction technology?
Projects using innovative construction technologies notified by MoHUA shall be eligible for an additional Grant in the form of Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) @?1000 per sqm on built up area (including internal infrastructure) for 30 sqm. per unit to the implementing agencies under AHP vertical.

12. Can public and private agencies take loans from HUDCO under the PMAY (U) 2.0?
State/UT/ULBs/Parastatals and other Public/Private Agencies implementing PMAY-U 2.0 may avail loan from HUDCO at affordable rates to contribute State/UT/ULB share and meet the financial requirement for completion of the projects under PMAY-U 2.0.

13. How much investment will be made under the PMAY (U) 2.0?
The total investment of PMAY-U 2.0 is estimated to ?10 Lakh Crore (Rupees Ten Lakh Crore) which will be spread over five year for construction of around 1.00 Crore houses for EWS, LIG and MIG category.

14. What will be the contribution of the Centre, State and beneficiaries under PMAY (U) 2.0?
Under PMAY (U) 2.0, ?1.60 lakh crore is expected as Central Assistance and minimum of ?0.70 Lakh crore is expected to be the corresponding State share under PMAY-U 2.0. The remaining cost of houses shall be borne by the beneficiaries of respective States/UTs.

15. How much funds have been allotted for capacity building activities in the scheme?
Under PMAY-U 2.0, 5% of the allocation shall be earmarked for capacity building, Information Education & Communication (IEC) and Administrative & Other Expenses (A&OE). 

16. How Capacity fund will be utilized under the scheme?
Allocation available under this head will be utilised for carrying out various activities required for effective implementation of the scheme including Establishment of PMU at National level, SLTC/CLTC, Trainings/Workshops/Study/ Exposure Visits, IEC, Social Audit, Third Party Quality Monitoring (TPQM), Information Technology, Geo-tagging, Administrative & Other Expenses (A&OE), and Research/Documentation etc
17. What is CRGFTLIH in the PMAY (U) 2.0 ?
States/UTs may facilitate the beneficiaries of any vertical of the scheme in taking affordable housing loan from Banks/HFCs/PLIs and these loans will be guaranteed under Credit Risk Guarantee Fund Trust for Low Income Housing (CRGFTLIH).

18. How much fund has been provisioned in the CRGFTLIH?
The corpus of CRGFT shall be increased from ?1,000 crore to ?3,000 crore over a period of 5 years.

19. Who will manage the CRGFTLIH
Management of CRGFTLIH will be done by National Credit Guarantee Trust Company Ltd (NCGTC) in place of National Housing Bank as per operational guidelines framed by MoHUA. 

Page 2 of 2


